============
Contributing
============

pyLXD development is done on `Github`_. Pull Requests and Issues should be
filed there. We try and respond to PRs and Issues within a few days.

If you would like to contribute major features or have big ideas, it's best to
post at the `LXD category in Ubuntu's Discourse
<https://discourse.ubuntu.com/c/lxd/126>`_ to discuss your ideas before
submitting PRs.  If you use ``[pylxd]`` in the title, it'll make it clearer.

Adding a Feature or Fixing a Bug
--------------------------------

The main steps are:

1. There needs to be a bug filed on the `Github`_ repository.  This is also for
   a feature, so it's clear what is being proposed prior to somebody starting
   work on it.
2. The pyLXD repository must be forked on Github to the developer's own
   account.
3. The developer should create a personal branch, with either:

   * feature/name-of-feature
   * bug/number/descriptive-name-of-bug

   This can be done with ``git checkout -b feature/name-of-feature`` from the
   main branch.
4. Work on that branch, push to the personal GitHub repository and then create
   a Pull Request.  It's a good idea to create the Pull Request early,
   particularly for features, so that it can be discussed and help sought (if
   needed).
5. When the Pull Request is ready it will then be merged.
6. At regular intervals the pyLXD module will be released to PyPi with the new
   features and bug fixes.

Releasing
---------

New versions of pyLXD are published to `PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/pylxd/>`_.

1. Bump the version in ``pyproject.toml``::

       [project]
       name = "pylxd"
       version = "<version>"
       ...

   Submit that change in a PR and get it merged.

2. Create a new release and tag on GitHub using the autogenerated release notes
   from the merged PRs.  Pushing the tag triggers the ``release`` workflow,
   which builds and verifies the archives and generates a `build provenance
   attestation
   <https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-for-github-actions/using-artifact-attestations/using-artifact-attestations-to-establish-provenance-for-builds>`_
   that cryptographically links them to the source commit.

3. Once the workflow completes, download the attested artifacts and verify
   them locally before uploading to PyPI:

   .. code-block:: console

       # Download the artifacts produced by the release workflow
       gh run download --repo canonical/pylxd --name dist --dir dist/

       # Verify each artifact's attestation (requires gh >= 2.49)
       gh attestation verify dist/pylxd-<version>.tar.gz --repo canonical/pylxd
       gh attestation verify dist/pylxd-<version>-py3-none-any.whl --repo canonical/pylxd

   Both commands must exit successfully before proceeding.  Verification
   confirms that each file's SHA-256 matches the digest recorded at attestation
   time, that the signing certificate was issued by GitHub's OIDC provider to
   the ``canonical/pylxd`` Actions runner, and that the record is present in
   the public Sigstore transparency log.

4. Upload the verified artifacts to PyPI:

   .. code-block:: console

       twine upload dist/*
       # or if there are multiple repositories configured, specify the repository
       twine upload --repository pylxd dist/*

   After a successful upload the new release is visible at
   https://pypi.org/project/pylxd/.

   .. note::

      Future improvement: the manual download-verify-upload steps above can be
      eliminated by configuring a `Trusted Publisher (OIDC)
      <https://docs.pypi.org/trusted-publishers/>`_ for the project on PyPI and
      adding a ``pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish`` step to the ``release`` workflow.

Requirements to merge a Pull Request (PR)
-----------------------------------------

In order for a Pull Request to be merged the following criteria needs to be
met:

1. All of the commits in the PR need to be `signed off using the '-s' option
   with git commit <https://git-scm.com/docs/git-commit>`_.
2. Unit tests are required for the changes.  These are in the ``pylxd/tests``
   directory and follow the same directory structure as the module.
3. The unit test code coverage for the project shouldn't drop.  This means that
   any lines that aren't testable (for good reasons) need to be explicitly
   excluded from the coverage using ``# NOQA`` comments.
4. If the feature/bug fix requires integration test changes, then they should
   be added to the ``integration`` directory.
5. If the feature/bug fix changes the API then the documentation in the
   ``doc/source`` directory should also be updated.
6. If the contributor is new to the project, then they should add their
   name/details to the ``CONTRIBUTORS.rst`` file in the root of the repository
   as part of the PR.

Once these requirements are met, the change will be merged to the repository.
At this point, the contributor should then delete their private branch.

Code standards
--------------

pyLXD formats code with Black and isort. Verify the formatting with::

    tox -e lint

If it fails, you can reformat the code with::

    tox -e format

Testing
-------

Testing pyLXD is in 3 parts:

1. Conformance with Black and isort, using the ``tox -e lint`` command.
2. Unit tests using ``tox -e py`` or ``tox -e coverage``.
3. Integration tests using the ``tox -e integration-in-lxd``.

.. note:: all of the tests can be run by just using the ``tox`` command on it's
          own, with the exception of the integration tests.  These are not
          automatically run as they require a working LXD environment.

All of the commands use the `Tox`_ automation project to run tests in a
sandboxed environment.


Unit Testing
^^^^^^^^^^^^

pyLXD tries to follow best practices when it comes to testing. PRs are gated
by `GitHub Actions <https://github.com/canonical/pylxd/actions>`_. It's best to submit tests
with new changes, as your patch is unlikely to be accepted without them.

To run the tests, you should use `Tox`_::

    tox

Integration Testing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Integration testing requires a running LXD system.  They can be tested locally
in LXD container with nesting support; ``tox -e integration-in-lxd``.

.. _Github: https://github.com/canonical/pylxd
.. _Tox: https://tox.wiki/en/latest/
.. _Multipass: https://github.com/canonical/multipass
